XVIII                                                                INLEIDING,

Sir John Digby, aan Salisbury, zou Sir R. Shirley zelf naar Nederland t)
zijn gegaan: Robert Shirley, since his going to Holland, much railed at by
the Spaniard. His brother, Sir Anthony, has lately had an increase of pension
and the habit of St. Tago sent to him. Thinks they would have done bettor to
have sent him a suit of clothes instead, for he hath scarce any to put
on his back’.

Over het geheel schijnt Sir Robert Shirley een tamelijk dubbelzinnige
rol te hebben gespeeld, want in bovengenoemd werk vinden. wij op blz. 205
in no. 486 een ander uittreksel van een. brief van Cottington aan Salisbury,
dd. Madrid 10 Augustus 1610, waarin o. a. het volgende voorkomt: The
Constable and the President of Portugal, the Conde de Salinas, appointed
to treat with Robert Shirley touching his propositions. He offers that tho
King of Persia shall draw all the great course of merchandise which the
Turk now brings to Aleppo, to some port in the Hast Indies as Ormus or
thereabouts. He also propoundsa plot for the maintenance in those seas of
fifty ships of war, which, with some other help from the King of Persia,
should take all trade from the Hollanders or English. Another Ambassador
from Persia arrived at Lisbon in one on the carracks, who brings in silk
and stones (edelgesteenten) a present of great value to the King of Spain.
Shirley is made much of and still very well entertained at the King’s
charge.

De Koning van Spanje heeft blijkbaar aan Shirley’s voorstellen geen
gevolg gegeven, want begin October 1611 kwam deze te Londen aan en
van 1 October 1611 tot 14 Januari 1618 ontving hij van Koning Jacobus I
een toelage van 4 per dag.

Overigens schijnt men in Engeland geen hoogen dunk van de gebroe-
ders Shirley te hebben gehad. Zoo schreef de aartsbisschop van Canterbury
(zie blz. Lxix van de Preface van deel 16171621 van genoemd werk):
tAs for Sir Robert Sherley, it hath bene the happe of his father’s children
to be all of them shifters, to venture on greate matters and to carry high
shewes (shoes) and in the end to come to beggary. Sir Thomas, the elder
brother, lyeth here in the Fleete (gevangenis van schuldenaren) for the
multitude of his debts. Sir Anthony in Spain hath. his pension seized and
the greatest part goeth towards his debts, some small portion being assigned
to him, to keepe him only from starving. Sir Robert Sherley, if he have
any religion, is a papist, as appeared when he was in Rome, and being
not able to get one penny out of the Pope’s purse, he desired certaine facul-
ties, indulgences (aflaten), medals and Agnus Dei to bee bestowed on
him .... In a worde, you know that he is an hungry fellow and liveth
merely by his witt, and therefore you are not to marvell at whatsoever he
doeth against his prince, country or the religion there professed’" Sir

1) Zie deze Inleiding, bla. LXIT,
