No. 137. 1628.                   250

No. 137. SCHULDBEKENTENIS VAN HENRY GOOCHE (,BEING NOW
EMPLOYED IN THE SERVICE OF THE HIGHE AND MIGHTIE PRINCE
THE KING OF ENGLAND) VOOR  100., DOOR HEM GELEEND VAN
VISNICH.
Ispahan 10 September 1628 ).

Noverint universi per praesentes me Henricum Gocheum 2), accademiae
Cantabrigiensis sacrae theologiae doctorem, teneri et firmiter obligari illustris-
simae confoederatarum Belgiae provinciarum societati in Orientali India nego-
clanti in summa ducentarum librarum bonae et legalis monetae Angliae ad
quamguidem solutionem bene et fideliter faciendam obligo me haeredes execu-
tores et administratores meos per praesentes, sigillo meo obsegnatas, datas Sep-
tembris decimo anni regni serenissimi domini nostri Caroii Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae et Hiberniae Regis, fidei defensoris etc. quarto virginei partus 1628.

Spahani, Persiae.

The condition of this obligation is such, that whereas the above named
Henry Goche, being nowe imployed in the service of the Highe and Mightie
Prince, the king of England, and having formerly solicited the English agent to
lend him upon assurance given for the repayment with dew interest such money
as hee wanted, but received a deniall, hath now upon his first motion, borrowed
so much of the right worshipfull Hubert Visnich, agent for the right honorable
East Indian Societye of the Netherlandes, above named, within the kingdom of
Persia. If the sayed Henry Goche, his heyres, executors or administrators shall
after his return into England, or, if it please God that hee dye by the waye, after
certan notice given thereof unto them, paye or cause to be payed unto the sayd
Socyetye, thayr lawfull attornyes or assignes, within three moneths after it shall
please them to demand it, the just sum of one hundred poundes of lawfull English
money, that then this bond shalbe voyde et of none effect, but otherwise shall
stand in full power and force; and it was sealed with a seale printed in red Spanish
waxe and there under it was subscribed: Henry Goche. On the side against
over it was written sealed and delivered in the prasens of us’ and it was sub-
scribed with divers hands: Sebastian Halmer, Ro Hedge.

In fidem quod praesens copia en vero et indubitato originali  penes
Illustrem Orientalis India Societatem Camerae Amstelodamensis existenti
bene et fideliter descripta ydem debita adhibita collatione verbotenus respon-
dere deprehensa sit,ego Petrus Ruttens, publicus imperiali curiag. suprema
Hollandia notarius attestor. Amstelodami, hac die 2 Juny a. 1631 ).

1) R. A., Kol. no. 1009 (Overgekomen papieren 1630, I). In margine staat, dat het ori-
gineel van het stuk naar Engeland gezonden werd.

2) Dr. Gooch, Engelsch geestelijke, in het gevolg van Sir Dodmore Cotton, Engelsch
ambassadeur in Perzi. Dr. Gooch schijnt zich niet zeer goed gedragen te hebben, want toen
de leden der ambassade van den Shah eerekleederen ten geschenke ontvingen, wierp Dr.
Gooch het zijne op den grond. Dientengevolge they were very meanly dispatched to Gom-
broon’’. Zie State Papers, Colonial, Wast Indies 16251629, blz. 563. Zie ook Visnich’s brief,
dd. 1 November 1628, en Thomas Herbert, Travels in Persia, edited by Sir William Foster
(Routledge, 1928), Index.

3) Geteekend: P. Ruttens, notarius pub. 1631’.
