INLEIDING.                                                                       XXVII

kunnen wij niet zeggen of de O. I. C. ook zonder deze voorstellen naar
Perzi zou zijn gegaan. Maar gezien de zeer goede verhouding, waarin
men van 16191623 tot elkander stond, is het wel aan te nemen, dat
genoemde voorstellen aan alle weifelingen te Amsterdam en Batavia een
eind maakten.                                             re

Aangaande onderhandelingen daarover is in de stukken in het
Rijksarchief niets anders te vinden dan de bloote vermelding door
Bewindhebbers in hunne reeds vermelde brieven, dat de Engelschen voor-
stellen hadden gedaan, om den handel in Perzische zijde voor gemeenschap-
pelijke rekening met hen te doen. De notulen van de vergaderingen der
Bewindhebbers tot het jaar 1652 zijn verloren gegaan.

Op mijn verzoek is Mr. William Foster, bewerker van The English
Factories in India, bereid geweest nasporingen in de archieven van het
India office te doen, en naar aanleiding daarvan schrijft hij dd. 3 Juni 1926:
The Court minutes (notulen) of the East India Company are missing
for the period 4 April, 1620, to 4 July, 1621. IT have gone through the
abstracts given in the Calendar of State Papers, East Indies, of the minutes
from 1 January to 4 April, 1620 but have found nothing therein about a
proposal to share the trade of Persia with the Dutch. Our corresponding
files of correspondence are likewise very imperfect; and though, in our
Java Record, vol. II, part I, we bave copies of letters exchanged between
the English and Dutch Companies in 161920 regarding the carrying
out of the Treaty of Defence, these make no allusion to Persia.

In the same volume is included some correspondence between the
English Company and the two commissioners (Sir Dudley Diggs and
Mr. Morris Abbot) sent to Holland in Nov. 1620. This contains as you
will see by the enclosed extracts, some references to the possibility, but no
allusion is made therein to any previous overtures on the subject, and the
English Company expressly states its desire that any offer should emanate
from the Dutch. This, however, does not exclude the possibility of some
unofficial suggestion to that effect having been already made, and I gather
from the letters you quote, that such must have been the case. But evi-
dently nothing came of the idea, owing, probably, to the friction that so
quickly developed over the carrying out of the Treaty of 1619. 1 may
add that the extracts I send have not been published, as far as I know; nor
have I seen any allusion to the matter in any printed. work’.

Mr. Foster voegde de hier volgende uittreksels bij bovenaangehaald
schrij ven:

I. O. Records, Java, vol. 2, part I.

Instructions to Sir Dudley Diggs and Morris Abbot, Nov. 1620.

.. Next falleth considerable the trade of Zuratt, where by the inter-
vening of the Dutch there is already a decaye of profitt of 50 per centum
(the doller in the firste voyage yielding 30, in the last 16); for settling
which trade and preventing itt from decay, thoughe the safest way might
