XXVIII                               INLEIDING.

seeme to enter into a conjunction of trade with the Dutche, yet forasmuch
as our advantage there is greater then theirs, itt were preposterous for
us to make the first overture thereof. But if in discussing of this businesse
they should seeme any way inclynable to propose such a conjunction, then
you are to enterteyne the notion, giving them a taste, as from yourselves,
that you doubte not but wee wilbe ready, uppon good termes, to accepte
thereof. But if no such inclination do appeare in them, then you may
require, according to the intent of the first article, that a reiglment of uni-
formitie of price in buying, especiallie in the mayne commodities, may be
established betwixt you, for the preventing of the incommodities of out-
bidding one annother. The like cautions you are to observe for the trade of
Persia and Red Sea, to sound what will proceede from them, as well in
your publique conferrences as in your private meetinges, and accordingly to
enterteyne the same with hopes that wee will not be much averse unto itt.
Diggs and Abbot at Amsterdam to the Company 1 Dec. 1620.

.. Wee conceave by their discourse a greate inclynation in them to
agree with us in all thinges that you desire for the accommodating of the
future trade, thoughe they do not much apprehend either that of Moha or
that of Persia, nor never mention the callicoes of Zuratt; wherein wee
have no reason to open their eyes ). But wee pray you uppon theise points
send our speediest directions what wee shall propose or conclude....
The same to the same, 23 Dec., 1620.

.... Theise thinges wee propose to you onelie, praying your best
advice for our direction, omitting callicoes and, the trade of Persia to be
reigled hereafter, the rather for that theise men say little or nothing of
them...

The Company to Diggs and Abbot, 4 January, 1621.

.. As for the treatie) at Zuratt, consisting principallie of indico
and callicoes, firste, you are to observe that clause of the instruction not
to propose the same, but to attend, the insisting uppon itt from them;
which wee cannot gather from yours (but implicitlie) that they have done,
and little conceave that they will demaund an eqvall division by halfes
with us.... All which considered, if you finde (as wee have said before)
that they are desireous to come into perticipation of that trade with us,
you may modestlie speake to them of a third parte with us.... and so
advertise us what they will further stand uppon in that businesse.

Uit het bovenstaande en uit hetgeen de Bewindhebbers aan van

1) Indian calicoes had been at once taken into favour in England, as being much
cheaper than linens imported from the Continent. A few years later (na 1619 nl.) the Company
declared that ’instead of paying 500.000 annually to Holland and France for linens, lawns
and cambrics, half the consumption of those articles is now superseded by the use of Indian
ealicoes’’’ (English Factories, 1618- 1621, Introduction, XX, noot 1).

2) Trade
